Title: <cite>The Atonement</cite>, Leon Morris
Category: theology
Tags: reviews
Date: 2014-03-16 15:00
Rating: 2/5

I had to read Leon Morris' _The Atonement_ for one of my classes this semester.
Given the importance of the doctrine of the atonement to our faith, I had hoped
that the book would be profitable and helpful in thinking through the issue.
Unfortunately, the book fell far short of my hopes.

Problems are manifold. Morris is simply not a very good writer. Run-on sentences
pop up regularly. He seems to be aiming for both a friendly conversational tone
and erudition. (Conversational and scholarly writing are both fine; the
combination fails miserably for nearly anyone but G.K. Chesterton or C.S. Lewis.
Take it from me: I know.) Most importantly, his chapters are essentially thesis-
less, and the "conclusions" to which he comes rarely follow from the material
presented in the rest of the chapter. The section on redemption was particularly
egregious in this regard: he turned from a long discussion of redemption
practices in the ancient world to a short summary focusing on the Christian view
of sin in contrast to the modern world's view of the human situation---with no
transition or connection between the two.

This is one of the basic problems with the book, in fact. His chapters are
essentially aiming to do two different things, it seems. On the one hand, Morris
is clearly interested in laying out the historical and linguistic background of
the various ideas associated with the atonement (the sacrificial system,
Passover, redemption, etc.). On the other hand, he clearly wants to find points
of application to the Christian life. In each chapter, he spends most of his
time on the first, then makes a rushed switch to the second for the final pages
of the chapter. At no point is this transition well-written, and in no chapter
does the application follow closely from the points he made in the background
material.

Even within the background material which dominates each chapter, Morris
wanders. It is as if he is not sure whether he wanted to provide an informative
overview of the context, to argue against various views others have offered
regarding that background,[^1] or to make some sort of theological argument.
Thus, he bounces between each of these modes rather haphazardly, sometimes even
within a single paragraph.

[^1]: Including, unfortunately, the occasional joke about the Church Fathers'
views on aspects of the atonement are. At one point, he goes so far as to
describe the Fathers' "ransom view" of the atonement as silly and only worth
laughing at. We might *disagree* with the Fathers---I do---but we hardly ought
to laugh at them. The chronological snobbery on display is obnoxious.

This emphasis on background also rather defeats the purpose of the book. If the
aim is to help people see and savor the glory of Christ's atoning work on their
behalf---a noble and worthy goal---then Morris simply did the wrong thing. He
spends most of his time in the book on word studies, historical context, and so
on. When he does get to his "application" sections,[^2] he usually has said very
little about Scripture's teaching on the atonement. Telling people what words
mean, or explaining the rabbis' records of Second Temple Judaism practice, is
not the same as explaining the Scriptures. The book reads like a sermon series
from the historical-grammatical school where the background has been mistaken
for the content instead of as a helpful tool where the content is not clear.[^3]
Morris wastes his readers' time with secondary matters and speeds over the
riches of the text itself.

[^2]: Usually focusing on the shape of the Christian life---an odd choice in a
book one would think would focus on the gospel itself.

[^3]: This is the way that the historical-grammatical approach normally goes
wrong. Other approaches have their own typical foibles, of course.

Finally, when Morris *does* pay attention to the actual content of Scripture
rather than its background, he tends to dwell on his hobby-horses instead of
letting Scripture speak for itself. He often writes things like, "Of course,
Scripture *does* include (one idea), but really we should take it (in some other
way)."---where the latter is his preferred reading, and the former the way the
text actually reads. His doctrine is reductionistic. Everything comes down to
the idea of payment for the guilt of sin, even in chapters where he tries to
talk about other things. To be fair, this is a book on the atonement... but
then, the fact that such a book tries to wrap up into that doctrine all the
other aspects of our redemption simply emphasizes the problem. Atonement is one
central and crucial (pun intended) part of our salvation, but it is not the
whole of our salvation.[^4]

[^4]: In this he is very much typical of evangelicalism, sad to say. We are a
crucicentric people, and though this has its upsides, it also means we tend to
rewrite all of our doctrines in terms of penal subtitutionary atonement, rather
than letting them all work together as they do in the Bible.

Morris' book could have and should have been a helpful volume. I had heard good
things about it and was looking forward to reading it. Unfortunately, the actual
reading was a chore, and it profited little. There are some good bits scattered
throughout. Unfortunately, to find them one must wade through a great deal of
poorly written, unnecessarily polemic, distracted meanderings about things that
are *not* the atonement. I cannot recommend it.