---
Title: A Profoundly Deficient Theological Anthropology
Subtitle: How most Christians have gotten the gay marriage debate wrong.
Summary: |
    How conservative Christians' views on sex helped create the situation we now
    face in our cultureâ€”and how we might improve.
Status: draft
Date: 2015-06-29 08:00
---

Over the past few years, we have watched as sexual mores have shifted---rather
dramatically---in American culture. We have seen the normalization of
homosexuality and the beginnings of the normalization of polyamory, and close
behind the first whispers of normalization for incest and pedophilia.
Theologically and socially conservative Christians have tried to fight this
shift over the few decades, and have (at least for the present) lost the public
debate. With the Supreme Court's ruling that same-sex marriage is legally
recognized in all fifty states, things feel to many like they have shifted under
our feet. Many leaders bemoan the degradation of our culture, and look with a
kind of horrified expectancy for legal activism against Christians and others
(Orthodox Jews, conservative Muslims, Mormons, and so on) who do not support the
new moral order.

Responses to these trends have included no few critiques of the very idea of
homosexual attraction on the one hand, and plenty of lambasting of a previous
generation's leaders on the other. The older conservatives often aimed to
undercut the gay rights movement by claiming that homosexuality, as such, does
not exist---that it is merely a choice, and one people can readily opt out of.
More, they took it as a point of political debate, and readily slammed people
facing homosexual attraction as *especially* sinful. Though this was perhaps
understandable in the face of brazen sexual immorality, it missed a few crucial
realities, not least the deeply human struggles and needs that even that brazen
immorality expressed. Among many younger conservatives, this tone has come to be
the fundamental error of the previous generation. Certainly, many younger
evangelicals have simply abandoned their parents' conservative stance on this
issue---but not *all* have, and those who have not have typically taken aim at
the older generations' tone and stance.

Both of these positions are partly right. Older conservatives have been right to
decry brazen sexual immorality as fundamentally destructive to culture. Younger
conservatives have been right when they have noted that much of the church's
response has been holier-than-thou and has mashed hard on people for attractions
and temptations they did not choose, and for which they have historically
suffered (a theme Ross Douthat [traced out thoroughly and carefully][Douthat]
last year as he reflected on this same outcome at lower levels of the court
system). As followers of Christ, we ought to be clear and forthright about moral
evils, and we do believe that sexual immorality, including the practice of
homosexuality, is in that category. However, as followers of Christ we also
ought to be deeply sympathetic to the reality that *none* of us choose our
struggles or our temptations, and equally to the fact that all of us sin
grievously, such that God's own self-sacrifice is necessary on *my* behalf. And
we have not threaded this needle well. We have tended either to hammer on "those
gays" or on "the judgmental church."

[Douthat]: 

But all of this is really driven by much older problems, and goes much deeper in
evangelicalism than these spasms on the surface might suggest. This is not
merely a reflection of evangelicalism's tone problem, or only a reflection of
the depravity of the world around us (depending on which cohort you ask).
Insofar as we have gotten this wrong in both of these ways---and we have, by
both capitulating to the world's mores and by responding in profoundly unloving
ways to our neighbors---it reflects a deeper problem in evangelicalism: a
profoundly deficient *theological anthropology*.

Our *theological anthropology* is the way we configure our understanding of what
it means to be a human being in light of our creation in the image of God. And
there is a lot even to that definition: *human being*, *image of God*, and
*creation* all warrant further unpacking, and the relationship between them is
neither simple nor unimportant. 

