---
Title: TBD
Status: draft
...

In my various readings this semester for my New Testament survey class,
including N. T. Wright's _Jesus and the Victory of God_ (reviewed
[here][review]) and Donald Guthrie's much older _Introduction to the New
Testament_, I have spent a great deal of time feeling as though I am beating my
head against a wall. Not because of these two books themselves, but because of
the arguments of which both necessarily spend much their time disposing.

[review]: /2015/an-apology-and-a-hermeneutic.html

Critical discussions of the historical reliability of the gospels and the
historical person of Jesus are, perhaps unsurprisingly given our two-millennium
remove from the events, complex. Moreover, as any (reasonable) scholar agrees,
the approach one takes to these books is necessarily informed by one's own
presuppositions. Neither secularist nor believing interpreters of the texts can
claim to be reading them unencumbered by their own biases to some degree.
However, as Wright points out: this is true of *all* historical work.

TODO

The burden of proof, it seems to me, is on those making the strongest claim. To
be sure, that certainly falls on the Christian in many ways: resurrections from
the dead are not everyday occurrences. But in many details of interpretation and
analysis of the gospels, the burden runs in the other direction. To suppose, for
example, that Jesus could not have spoken in both brief, parabolic style as he
is often reported to have done in the synoptic gospels and also in the lengthy,
non-parabolic discourses reported by John is absurd.

I use the word advisedly.

Any one of the scholars who have made these sorts of claims have themselves no
doubt engaged in any number of different ways of speaking depending on context.
A private discussion with friends will take a very different character than a
public lecture. A sermon and a counseling session are not the same. That a
compelling teacher might employ both parables and lengthy argument is not only
conceivable; it is utterly probable. What teacher of any popularity has *ever*
been so incapable of thoughtful communication as the Jesus assumed by these
portraits? The complete lack of imagination displayed by many critical scholars
in this regard is astounding.

The same is true of the now-common supposition, under the auspices of form and
redaction criticism, that the gospel authors formulated events to suit their own
theological agendas. While granting that such innovation is certainly possible
(and that scholars must deal with it honestly) we should also remember that the
disciples were themselves responding to *something*. If we wish to credit Paul,
John, Luke, Matthew, Mark, Peter, and the rest as theologically creative
individuals, why is it so inconceivable that Jesus himself---the common starting
point for all of their reflections---was in fact theologically innovative? As
Wright comments:[-@wright:jvg, 479]

> Precisely because Matthew, Mark, Luke and John appear to be creative and intelligent writers and theologians, we must hypothesize, as the common element standing behind all four... some greater, more original, more subtle mind. Who would give shelf-room to a book arguing that all the most majestic and subtle music attributed to Johann Sebastian Bach was in fact the work of his four composing sons...? We may perhaps be allowed to look forward to a new day, in which Jesus himself is acknowledged, in his own right, as a thinking, reflecting, creative and original theologian.
